Preparations for Seminar 2 – Problematisation, Research questions, and Research design
For the second seminar I would like to return to the problems that are somehow driving your theses works. If
you are working with a project that emanates from a practical problem (or challenge or opportunity) that
some principal organisation is facing, it is probably wise to unpack and analyse this problem in greater detail
– analyse how it has come about, what it is contingent upon and related to and a consequence of, for whom it
is particularly pertinent, and what the nature of it might be (is it technological, organisational, marketing- or
sustainability related, etc, or does it transgress such categorisations?). But this is not the only problem that is
important to identify in order to advance your work. For this seminar, I would like you to also identify the
problem, or the set of problems, that are motivating and guiding your work from a research point of view, or
from a more theoretical point of view.
Having started to review and analyse several different frames of references that seem relevant to
your project (keep going with this work!), your first task for this seminar is to identify and present some
problem(s) in this literature, which help(s) you motivate that you carry out an empirical study (if this is the
case) of the phenomenon you are somehow addressing. What limitations do you see in this literature that
motivates your thesis? What does extant literature fail to capture? What further research is the literature
calling for, and how does that align with what you are doing? How is the current understanding of the
phenomenon you are addressing lacking in rigour, depth, detail? Is there a lack of empirical studies from the
domains you explore? What is still poorly understood or underdeveloped? Are the conceptualisations lacking
in theoretical sophistication? Is the literature making assumptions that you find problematic? Are there
important gaps in the literature that need filling? Or are there dominant perspectives or conceptual
understandings that are worth complementing or challenging?
Contemplating questions such as these could supposedly help you introduce and motivate your thesis
topic, and position your work in relation to existing research that has grappled with similar issues as the ones
you are interested in. But thinking through these questions also pose further questions to your respective
projects, with the most pressing one perhaps being what kind of phenomenon you are actually studying. If
you think of your study as a case study (most degree projects end up as such, I would say), what may it in
fact be a case of?
If you are working with an external partner, and looking into some specific aspect of this
organisation, what is it in fact that are you exploring at this empirical site? Will your external partner
organisation at all make out your case? Or are you rather looking outwards, towards inter-organisational
relationships, across the value chain/network, or at some other aspect of the industry or market context, and
will this perhaps constitute the case in your thesis project? Or are you perhaps studying an industry and the
institutions governing it, to understand the conditions for a certain technology, business model, value
proposition to align or otherwise make an impact upon this field (with the case circling around the fit
between field and technology/business model/value proposition)? If you are interviewing many different
actors in an industry, does that automatically mean that you are conducting a multiple case study, or does it
rather indicate that your case transgresses the boundaries of one organization, and perhaps moves at another
analytical (meso) level? To get some inspiration for discussing the merits of your case in a forthcoming
methodology section, Ivwould strongly recommend Bent Flyvbjerg’s very accessible article “Five
misunderstandings about case-study research” (you will find it at Studentportalen).
When considering the empirical site or the empirical field you are addressing, it is also worth
contemplating how this is perhaps changing or developing, to find cues to further theoretical limitations that
you could pick up on. Perhaps changes to the practical/industrial context you are addressing have not been
properly acknowledged and/or researched by the literature in this field?
Furthermore, figuring out what general phenomenon you are addressing and what your case might be
a case of is probably really helpful for identifying a theoretical problem to which your case study (if you are
indeed conducting one) could contribute with valuable knowledge, insight and understanding. Supposedly,
the aim of your thesis will be to throw further light on the kind of problem(s) that you identify. And this
makes out the second task for the seminar – to formulate the aim or purpose of your project; and to do so in a
way that leaves the practical task handed to you by an external supervisor aside. Ideally, the aim and purpose
of your thesis will also tickle the curiosity of your external supervisor, but you should not get stuck in the
practical problem you are engaging with.
Third, your task is to (re)formulate the research questions that allow you to reach up to your
objectives with your thesis. Which questions do you need to pose in order to fulfil the aim of your thesis
project? How do the questions build upon one another? And how could you formulate them in conceptual
terms, to indicate how and by means of what theoretical resources you will address them?

Fourth, I want you to think through how your study could/should be designed so as to enable you to
address the questions you have just articulated. Provide a brief outline of how you plan to go about studying
the phenomenon your are addressing, and what motivates this/these approach(es). How will you collect/
generate empirical data? And what limitations you see in designing your study in this way? Such a
description could feature in your introductory chapter, after you present your research question, to introduce
the reader to how you intend to address these questions, and to the logic guiding the design of the study.
Taking on these different tasks thus amounts to writing a first draft of an introductory chapter to your thesis,
which:
1) introduces the problem that you seek to analyse and discuss through your work
2) presents the aim of the study and the research questions you will address
3) accounts most briefly for how you will take on these questions and what the limitations of your approach
may be
Write three to four A4 pages (excluding a properly structured reference list added at the end of your
text), problematises the phenomenon that you are faced with, and email this text to the entire seminar group.
At Studentportalen, you will find some complementary readings that could further help you in your problem
formulations.
✯ ✯ ✯

Now, if you find the instructions above too abstract, or difficult to digest for various reasons, you will – in
the below sections – find some further questions that might get you into problematisation mode. I have stolen
them from previous degree project classes, when the first seminar in the course circled around
problematisation, and your fellow students were urged to translate practical tasks/challenges into more
conceptual problems. Possibly, some of you will still find them useful. Under a first heading, I have
assembled a number of questions that encourage you to analyse the empirical background of your respective
theses topics, and the problems/challenges they are associated with. Under the second heading, you will find
a set of questions that might help you conceptualise the more practical tasks you have perhaps been handed.
Thirdly, there are a number of questions urging you to (re)formulate your research question, and think
through the design of your study.
Background description and analysis
–
Account for the task that has been handed to you, or that you have chosen to engage with, and try to
both describe and analyse its background. What practical problems or future challenges/opportunities
motivate the work that you are embarking on? How does the principal – if you do indeed have one – explain
that these challenges/opportunities have emerged? What macro changes in the world – political, economic,
social, legal, environmental, technological, etc – appear to be motivating your work? And what meso/micro
changes – at the industrial, organisational, or individual level – seem to be relevant to it? What analysis does
your principal provide of macro and meso/micro changes that they are faced with? To what extent do you
share such an analysis, and how do perhaps you wish to complement it, or deviate from it?
–
If you are indeed working for a principal, how does it perceive of the problem motivating your work
– as a technical, economic, or organisational problem? Or as a combination of these? Or perhaps as a more
niched problem – purely a marketing problem? Do you share these views? What are the expectations on the
outcome of your work, in relation to the problems, challenges, opportunities identified by your principal, and
by yourself? What dilemmas are your work supposed to put right, or at least provide further insight into?
What perceptions and ideas about how the industry/society works, and how it will change in the future, can
be found on part of your principal? What kind of knowledge does the principal expect you to deliver
(descriptive-analytical, analytical-normative, etc)? To what extent do you share the perceptions and the
analyses motivating the task, and the expectations regarding its outcome? Are there other trends and
dynamics at work that you wish to focus upon? Are the expectations upon your work reasonable? Does it
seem possible, to you, to generate the kind of knowledge that is expected of your work? Are there at all any
clear expectations as to what your work shall result in, knowledge-wise? How could the task be made
interesting to more actors than merely the principal by broadening the discussion of the problem, using more
theoretical terms, for instance?
–
One often hears that knowledge is powerful, which implies that knowledge is generated in order to
be put to use – but for what purposes, and by whom, against whom? Whose interests does the task and the
knowledge production serve? The organisation as a whole, or some specific branch of it? Will it be used

tactically or strategically within the organisation, as a bat also in internal political battles? Or to strengthen a
competitive advantage? Or to forge a new one? Is there any part of the larger organisation that might benefit
from the knowledge you seek to generate, while some other part might suffer? Does this have any impacts
on what kind of knowledge that you are expected to generate? Does it raise any moral or ethical issues?
Conceptualisation
–
Account for the concrete problem in more abstract terms – in a more conceptual or theoretical way.
Is this kind of problem familiar to us? How has it been talked about before, in more theoretical terms? Is
there already a theoretical terminology, and perhaps even core concepts and models, that seek to capture this
kind of problem? What does the literature treating this subject area have to say? Is the theoretical debate
largely in consensus, or is it fragmented and conflictual, flocked by different theoretical perspectives? Does
it perhaps call for in-depth case studies of the phenomena in question (and could this be your edge)? What
different literature streams are tying into your topic/problem/question? Is the terminology, and are the
concepts and models you find in the(se) literature(s) of any use to you? Why? Why not? What new concepts
would you like to import into the field? And what established concepts do you consider to be most important
for discussing your problem in a more general way? In what sense could your problem be conceived of as a
particular example of something more universal?
–
How does the problem that is emerging through your background description and analysis tie into
theoretical discussions that are kept within the management field? If we treat theory as a kind of language
and a conceptual apparatus through which we see the world, and seek to understand it (a kind of lenses, each
with their own particular colour), which concepts are available for us, and what can they help you see? What
do they blind you from – what falls without their respective fields of vision? Does this motivate further
theoretical perspectives? Do the voices that try to make themselves heard in the theoretical field appear to be
unanimous, are they in accordance with one another, or do they talk about different aspects of the problem or
phenomenon in question? Are they perhaps even contradicting one another? It has been known to happen
that research is contradictory...
–
How do you view the problem that makes out the basis for your thesis – is it primarily of
technological, organisational, or economic character? Or are perhaps all these dimensions as central? Is it
possible to separate them? Do you need different concepts to discuss different aspects? Is there reason to
break them up into even more specific parts or subfields – leadership, strategy, marketing, product
development, organisational change, etc? Or perhaps broaden the categories? Culture? Politics/Policy?
Ethics? What other categories and concepts do you perceive to be central, and which ones would you like to
work with? – Is the problem or topic that you are dealing with a common theme in the literature on
management and organisation, or do you seem to be dealing with an overlooked or neglected phenomenon?
Does this problematic appear to turn on its head some more widespread perception or understanding, found
in popular literature within the field, of how things work? What problems do you believe that the literature
suffers from? What theoretical contribution could your study make to the literature? What theoretical
contribution would you like to make? To what theoretical discussion/debate do you think that you could
have something to say, if you succeed in what you set out to do in the thesis?
Research question, method/methodology, and ethical implications
–
From the description, analysis, but also conceptualisation and theorisation that you have now
initiated, what do you take to be the main aim and purpose of your work? What questions will you address in
order to answer to this aim and purpose? How can you formulate a purpose and subsequent research
questions to make them scientifically relevant? What makes your thesis work interesting also from a
theoretical point of view?
–
Which partial questions guide your study, and how do you envision different knowledge components
to build upon one another? What is the logic to the design of the study? How will you, practically, address
these questions? What research methods do you think will render the best answers to your questions, and the
most relevant knowledge concerning the problem and the different questions that you are engaging with? –
What ethical implications could you imagine that your study might have? If you achieve what you set out to
do, what ethical implications might your analysis, your results, and your potential recommendations have?

