Instructions for literature review seminar
The exercise for the first degree project seminar is to get going with your literature reviews. The purpose of
reviewing literature, which connects to the phenomenon you are interested in, could be understood as
fourfold:
First, identifying literature that could be relevant to your project will inform you of how others have
(typically) approached the kind of problem or phenomenon you are interested in, and it will show you how
research – and the ongoing scientific debate that constitutes it – has unfolded over time, what questions it is
currently preoccupied with, and what we currently (think we) know about a certain topic.
Second, reviewing literature will probably open your eyes to several different streams of research or
knowledge fields associated with your topic, and also to different ways of addressing and dealing with
problems and phenomena akin to the one you are engaging with; supposedly, it will thus offer you many
different perspectives and terminologies on your topic, and it will require that you start relating to these
different knowledge fields, streams of research, perspectives, or paradigms, and reflect upon what you could
take from them (and what to leave out), how you could integrate insights and outstanding questions from
different areas to motivate and frame your project.
Third, such incipient analyses of extant literatures will hopefully help you identify relevant
conceptual frameworks, sharpen your own research questions and show how they pick up on or otherwise
relate to existing academic debates, in ways that make them more scientifically relevant.
Fourth, these endeavours will ultimately enable you to position your own work in relation to
contemporary research and help you think about how you could contribute to this research – how your
results, once you have gotten that far, could speak back to and complement or even challenge previous
research findings.
To prepare for the seminar, your task is to write at least five A4 pages (excluding a properly
structured reference list added at the end of your text), where you account for relevant literatures, and
explore how they relate to one another and to your own project. Email this text to the entire seminar group
(including the subject reader). We will then spend the seminar discussing your contributions and practicing
opposition/defence.
To get going with this work (which is supposed to align almost entirely with drafting your thesis), try to
identify different literature streams that address similar issues to the ones you are interested in, and begin to
analyse what they have to say, and how they address the topics they circle around. Here are some pointers
and questions to help you structure your thoughts and take your work forwards:
– Which are your subject areas? What literatures should you home in on?
:: Literature treating the empirical phenomenon – a certain kind of technology, a certain kind of
organisation (or even a certain organisation), a certain industry or institution? Literature treating the kind of
question/problem/situation you are addressing in a more general and perhaps also theoretical way –
technological change in more general terms, more generic organisational dynamics or management/
leadership issues, competitive dynamics common to different industries?
:: Do such literatures at all differ in your case? Are there intersections where they meet? Are those
intersections so marginal that you should zoom out, or is there a point of focusing and zooming in, not to
drown in sheer volume of research?
:: Contemplating what your case could be a more general example of, ‘a case of’ as it were, might
help you find relevant literature streams or ‘theoretical frames of references’ relevant to your topic; but
remember that the kind of literature that you engage with – whatever it is – could evoke a different framing
of your case, so it is up to you to frame your case by means of relevant literature
:: Look to review articles, or articles that provide an overview of how a certain phenomenon is
addressed within a certain field, to get some help with structuring the knowledge fields you are interested in
:: Use scholar.google.com to search, but search also within specific journals (journals often try to sustain
their own debate on a certain topic); try to see lineages between different articles, and keep your eyes open
for influential, agenda setting ones, and how their arguments have been reiterated
– Identify how different knowledge discourses that are relevant to the problem you are facing seem to relate
to one another, and begin to relate to them in critical and reflective ways

:: Where are the literatures coming from, why do they approach things differently?
:: Every
phenomenon could be conceptualised in a lot of different ways, so finding relevant literature is also a matter
of making decisions of where you wish to take your project and how you wish to frame it (and motivating
that choice)
:: Motivate why different literatures or frames of references are important for your thesis project
:: Read up on recent theoretical extensions of these literatures, and the points they make and the questions
they raise
:: Contemplate what questions your project poses to the different literature streams, or how
questions that they raise feed into your project
:: What questions do the literature point to as particularly interesting, going forward? Almost all
research calls for more research, and more detailed understandings of organisational practices – if you are
doing a case study, perhaps you could make a serious empirical contribution through the generous access
you might have been granted to a specific organisation…
– Be attentive to and begin to delineate different theoretical or conceptual frameworks deployed in the
frames of references you have identified
:: Are you dealing with an integrative knowledge field, or are there different conflicting theoretical
paradigms at work in the field? Often, there are more or less explicit conflicts between different theoretical
perspectives, due to them concentrating and emphasising different aspects of the phenomena in question…
:: Do you find any relevant theoretical tools within the extant literature, or do you need to import new ones?
Do some appear more interesting/useful/appealing than others? Start to identify potential theoretical
concepts that you wish to work with, and others that seem less useful – you will not be able to integrate too
many conceptual frameworks in your own analysis
Thinking about the literature you review in these ways will supposedly help you rephrase your research
questions and position your own work in relation to established knowledge and outstanding questions within
the subfield(s) you are working in. Indeed, how could they be formulated against the theoretical backgrounds
you have now sketched?

