Seminar 4 – Empirical narratives and analysis
It is time to start thinking about the fourth seminar in our degree project series, and about your empirical
material, your analyses, and your discussions. In this seminar, we will take a closer look at some of the
materials that you are currently processing, with a particular focus on how you seek to present and analyse it
in your thesis manuscripts.
This time, I want you to showcase roughly six pages that a) give us some indication of how you plan to
structure and present your findings, and b) provides a glimpse of how you (think you) will conduct your
analysis. Perhaps one section gives the readers some insight into an empirical narrative, while a second one
provides an example of how, and by means of what conceptual tools, you will analyse this empirical material
(at some other analytical “level”). Or perhaps your text illustrates how already your empirical findings take
the shape of one or a series of analyses. There are no fixed rules for how to separate an empirical narrative
from a more analytical part; nor are there any rules determining when to conflate the two. But make sure that
the strategy you choose for presenting and analysing your material resonates with your methodological
choices and arguments, and makes reading the empirical/analytical accounts worthwhile (and not too
repetitive). If you separate presentation of empirical material from an analysis of the same, be careful not to
present new empirical material in a section where the purpose is to analyse something that you have
previously narrated, in one way or other (that is basically a universal faux pas, and hence a rule, after all – if
you do indeed separate your empirical presentation from more analytical sections). In your analytical
sections, you should also try to avoid introducing new theoretical concepts that have not priorly been
introduced in your literature reviews or theory chapters. Think, instead, of an analysis as the place where you
set your theoretical concepts to work, to bring out further understanding and perhaps help explain why/how
something is the case. Then, as you move towards a discussion section, you are invited to discuss how your
analysis resonates with, misaligns with, or challenges ideas that you have encountered in your review of
relevant literature – to articulate the contributions your findings offer extant research.
When it comes to finding a suitable structure for presenting your empirical material, one way to start could
be to read through your empirical material, and pick out interesting fragments or storylines that somehow
relate to theoretical concepts, themes, mechanisms, dynamics that have caught your interest – fragments that
align with some theoretical idea, or challenge, or contradict it. Perhaps you make a scrap book of
observations and conceptualisations, which you order in different ways – thematically and/or how the
observations (mis)align with what theory stipulates. Perhaps this work enables you to build a synopsis of
potential headings and subheadings, of the things you wish to pick out from your material. And perhaps this
process tells you whether your narrative is driven by a thematic analysis that revolves around established
theoretical aspects, or if the act of coding comes from your own, more or less filtered interpretation of the
empirical material.
A common way to structure the presentation of empirical material is arguably to order it thematically. But
“common” also means mainstream, and perhaps even bordering on the boring. So, take some time to at least
reflect on other modes of presenting your material, and separating the empirical from the analytical (if such a
distinction is motivated). Collecting fragments and ordering them in different ways and along different
analytical dimensions might open for a presentation of the empirical material which circles around different
events or episodes that you have encountered – and that you want to showcase to the reader to illustrate
different ways in which some process unfolds, or different dynamics at work in some phenomenon and
shaping how it manifests itself. Perhaps you wish to present a specific case-example and how this unfolds
over time, relying on the informants’ own analyses of this process in an empirically driven section (providing
an emic account/analysis of the situation, using the informants’ own narratives to explicate what has been the
case); and perhaps you wish to complement this by a more explicit conceptualisation, a more theoretically
driven (etic, and perhaps explanatory) analysis in a subsequent section – one which teases out mechanisms or
dynamics at work in the situation/phenomenon in question?
One could go on with potential ways to present and to structure your findings and your analysis; there are
indeed a million ways to do it, and also a myriad of ways of thinking about potential differences between
empirical narratives and more conceptual analyses. But whichever way you choose, watch out for a
presentation strategy that lays out a series of interview transcripts from different informants on some
particular matter. You will have to form some kind of narratives from the material you have collected/
generated, which order and recount for your empirical findings. Please have a look at Barbara Czarniawska’s

text on narrative approaches, uploaded to Studentportalen. Once you get past the first few pages, it becomes
really interesting.
Further, the point of the exercise is to give a clear indication of what concepts or theoretical framework that
you will somehow deploy for analysing your material. What are the key theoretical notions, models or
conceptual relations that help you make sense of what you have seen, and how are they somehow mobilised
or operationalised to drive an analysis that allows you to see and to say something more than a mere
empirical description would do? Try to at least give us a short sample of how this might look (yes, I know it
will be work in progress, but give i a try!). A trick here could of course be to pay close attention to how other
researchers have structured their empirical findings–analysis sections in research articles that you rely on in
your study, or that you have come across throughout your master’s education, and that you have enjoyed
reading. Try also to motivate for yourselves and to the reader why you have chosen a certain narrative and
analytical strategy.
If an analysis is a section where you seek to make sense of the material that you have generated through your
study by means of conceptual/theoretical tools, it is quite different from a discussion section. If the former is
all about breaking your empirical material down into atoms, applying a certain conceptual lens and looking
at your material as a case of something more abstract, and/or synthesising your observations to provide a
more holistic understanding of the dynamics at work in your particular case, the latter is more about
discussing the implications of the analytical understanding that you have generated. This means speaking
back to: 1) literature within your field, and exploring how your work complements, contrasts, and contributes
to that frame of references; to 2) practice; and to 3) society by and large, by discussing ethical concerns of
having generated the kind of knowledge that the thesis presents, by discussing policy implications, or other
societal issues that could be worth contemplating.
Your task, at this point is not to write a discussion part, but to supplement the six (or so) pages of text with a
list of things or aspects that you believe that your findings and your analysis will motivate a discussion of.
What implications does it point to – relative the literature you have begun to review, and relative the
practical concerns that you have encountered? And what ethical concerns are related to producing the kind of
knowledge that your project is generating? Try to come up with at least three different topics that might be
worth discussing.

